Slide 1:
Hello I am ruurd bijlsma, I will present my project about testing the interaction between navigation strategies for predators and prey.

Slide 2: Introduction:
When modelling a predator hunting a flock of birds or a school of fish there are multiple strategies to consider. What is usually modelled is that the predator will move toward the location of the selected prey, but when the predator then arrives at the position of the prey, the prey will have already moved away. At this point the predator can try catching up to the prey if it is faster, but maybe there is a better way. 
Homing missiles don't point toward the position of their target, they will move to try to intercept their target. This can also be used as a strategy for the predator, it can be applied through proportional navigation. The dragonfly also uses this strategy to catch its prey, for the dragonfly it works by keeping the prey at an angle in the field of view of the predator. This proportional navigation strategy has been shown to be optimal against targets that are moving in a straight line.

Slide 3: Research Question:
The main focus of this project is to find out whether proportional navigation is the optimal predation strategy when the prey tries to escape. To find out we need to create a realistic model of the interaction between prey and predators, in our case we implemented fish behaviour, including flocking, different escape strategies and two predation strategies. The predator strategies that will be compared are proportional navigation and direct navigation.


Slide 4: Direct Navigation:
The implementation for direct navigation is quite simple, the predator will simply move toward the current position of the prey, essentially keeping the prey centered in its field of view. The video shows direct navigation.

Slide 5: Proportional navigation:
Proportional navigation is not too different compared to direct navigation, even if the resulting behaviour isn't so similar. In proportional navigation the predator tries to keep the prey's position on it's retina constant and at an angle. The video on the right shows proportional navigation in action.

Slide 6: Intercept example:
Here we have a part of the video where one of the interceptions happen, the predator moves toward the future location of the prey, (point out with mouse, next, next), and then intercepts it

Slide 7: Escape Strategies:
Besides the predator's strategies, there is also an implementation for four escape strategies. The default strategy is to simply turn away from the direction of the predator. Turn 90 degrees will have the prey turn 90 degrees compared to the direction of the predator. With sacrifice one prey will simply give itself up to the predator in hopes that other fish have a better chance of escaping. With sprint the fish move away from the predator similarly to the default strategy, but they will also increase speed while they are fleeing. 

Slide 9: Measuring performance:
Before we get into any results, we need to figure out how we should measure the performance of the predator. There are two strategies here. We can measure catches per time unit or catches per attack. I decided to mainly go with the catches per attack performance measure, because it seems to reflect real life more closely. Every attempt to catch a prey will burn up precious energy in the predator, so we shouldn't ignore failed attempts.

Slide 10: Optimal Proportionality:
The proportional navigation has a tunable parameter; namely the proportionality constant. This can be used to tweak how strong the navigation change in heading can be. To optimize this parameter we tested it with multiple values and chose the value with the highest performance, which seems to be 1000, although there isn't much difference between that and the higher values.

Slide 11: Testing our hypothesis:
At the start of the presentation we said we already know from missiles that proportional navigation is the optimal strategy against prey moving in a straight line. Our model also shows that this is true. When no escape strategy is implemented, and the prey just move in a straight line the proportional strategy is clearly better as seen in this boxplot.
But why does proportional win here? In our model the predator and the prey have similar moving speed, which means that when direct navigation is used the predator will move to the target, and get behind it without being able to catch it. If the movement speed of the predator would be higher than the prey, the performance is much closer between the two strategies.

Slide 12: Results - equal speed:
Here we have the results for prey that are flocking and use escape strategies. The red bars are for direct navigation, the blue bars are for proportional navigation, the escape strategies labeled below on the x-axis. As you can see the performance is quite low, this is because the speed of the predator is set equal to the speed of the prey, which means that the prey will just escape and the predator will rarely catch the prey. One thing that is quite interesting is that the proportional navigation is very successful against the turn 90 degrees escape strategy even when the speed of the predator is equal to the speed of the prey. (next slide)

Slide 12: Results - faster predators:
The predators are suddenly much more successful when they are just 20% faster than the prey. When the escape strategy is sprint the predators will still not catch the prey, because they just move away too quickly. As for the predator strategies, generally the direct navigation has better performance than proportional navigation. Proportional navigation really shines when turn 90 degrees is used by the prey. Direct navigation struggles to get a 20% success rate with this strategy, while proportional navigation has about 40 to 50% success rate here.

Slide 13: Resulting Patterns - Direct & turn 90 deg:  (don't play entire video, just show the point)
To explain some of this behaviour we will look at how direct navigation performs against the turn 90 degrees strategy. This strategy really shows the main flaw with direct navigation, it goes to a position where the prey will not be when it arrives at that position. Usually its speed can compensate and catch the prey anyways, but when it turns away quickly the predator loses the prey.

Slide 14: Resulting Patterns - Proportional & turn 90 deg: (dont play entire video, just show the point)
Now we will look at the same video but with proportional navigation. This type of navigation is much better for this type of escaping prey, because of the fact that it tries to intercept the prey, and therefore has a much better line of attack when they suddenly turn 90 degrees.

Slide 15: Resulting Patterns: Direct & default:
Here we have direct navigation against the default turn away strategy. We can see that the predator move behind the prey and slowly catches up to it.

Slide 16: resulting patterns: prop & default
This is proportional navigation against the default turn away strategy. The predator here tries to intercept the prey, but they move directly away from the predator which causes the predator to lose the prey often. 

Slide 16: Conclusion:
Our main aim for this project was to find out if proportional navigation is optimal when prey tries to escape. We found that the answer is: it depends on the escape strategy that the prey uses. When the prey tries to turn away from predators, and the predator is even slightly faster than the prey then direct navigation is better than proportional navigation, because direct navigation will catch up to the prey, while proportional navigation loses the target. When the prey tries to move 90 degrees away from the predator proportional navigation is better, and it's even quite viable when the predator can't go faster than the prey. So in practice to know which predation strategy would be best you first have to look at how the prey of choice try to escape when they are targeted by a predator.

Slide 17: Possible Future Work:
I think one of the biggest  improvements that could be made here is to try out multiple strategies for prey acquisition. Right now the model chooses a prey based on the closest fish within the field of view of the predator. For the proportional navigation strategy other strategies might be more useful, like the strategy dragonflies seem to use in real life. According to the paper by Olberg about prey pursuit in dragonflies, they wait until a prey moves across the field of view of the dragonfly with high enough speed, then it will decide to hunt that prey. This is because further away prey will move slower, and this navigation strategy seems to be better at catching prey that move orthogonally to the predator. 
Besides this one could also try to find the lower speed limit of the predator when the predator uses proportional navigation and the prey uses turn 90 degrees, since this was the only combination of strategies where the predator could be successful while it is equal speed to the prey. You could plot the performance of the predator for multiple predator speed values.

